Cover letter (1 page)
Hello Mozilla Fellowship for Science application review team!

I am motivated to contribute to the open science movement because it is faithful to the potential of what science can be — working openly enables scientists to be more collaborative, reproducible, accessible, and impactful. My scientific training has taken place in neuroscience wet labs that conduct the basic cell biology on which our understanding of the brain is based. During my 8 years of experience, I have seen cultural norms stand in the way of open science. As a result, I’ve worked for cultural change through practical user focused education (R is better than that expensive proprietary software!) and big picture discussions on the future of data. I am applying to the Mozilla Fellowship for Science to develop open educational resources and catalyze cultural change in science.

The future of science is Open, but the perceived cost of entry is high. Oregon Health and Science University (OHSU) needs support to “level up” researcher code literacy, data management, and sharing practices through programs relevant to both small data wet labs and big data dry labs. I am uniquely positioned to be that support. As a PhD student, I have worked at OHSU to develop programs to kickstart the conversation on open scientific practices, teach code literacy, and facilitate the use of tools that enhance reproducibility and transparency. Through the Open Insight series and other collaborations, I’ve organized events that challenge research scientists to both learn open tools (e.g., hands on web app development for scientists, Git and GitHub, Rstats for n00bs, Science Hack Day PDX), and think deeply about the context of their work and life span of their data (e.g., discussions with thought leaders). My experience at OHSU allows me to leverage Mozilla’s expertise to make the practice and philosophy of openness relevant and tangible to my peers.

I have hosted hands on events that engaged scientists at the individual researcher level, and revealed labs that are interested in open practices, but who are not yet open champions. For example, the Git and GitHub workshop I organized drew 70+ people from diverse labs, including 14 from one group. This lab wanted to use Git, but not everyone knew how, so they had been emailing code back and forth. The workshop was successful, but I don’t have the resources to provide followup support. Did they incorporate Git and Github into their workflows? With the support of OHSU and Mozilla, I can work with this and other labs to facilitate the sustainable adoption of open tools and practices. The Mozilla Fellowship for Science will enable me to reduce the barriers to open science by providing hands on training at the individual level, developing labs into champions of open practices through on-campus support, and building case studies of how open champions are made.

By working with a cohort of likeminded fellows and the wider Mozilla community, I hope to learn effective strategies from open source and other scientific fields to implement effective educational and outreach programs that support cultural change at my home institution. Mentorship at OHSU from Dr. Allison Fryer, Associate Dean of the Graduate Studies, along with Robin Champieux, Scholarly Communication Librarian and open science advocate, will provide access to student and researcher populations across OHSU and develop my leadership skills.

As a community organizer at OHSU, I understand how to hack the culture to catalyze change — but I need support and mentorship from Mozilla to take my work to the next level. With this support and that of my home institution, I will be in a strong position to make an impact at OHSU and beyond. I’m thrilled for the opportunity to work with the Mozilla team. Thank you for considering my application.
